hi I'm Lily and we are here in Svalbard
exploring the life cycles of plants with
BBC Earth
[Music]
this is a series about life cycles but
why life cycles well everything in the
universe happens in cycles so we know
they're important from the birth and
destruction of a star to the Earth's
rotation around the Sun which makes the
seasons
[Music]
so in the plant kingdom the cycle is
usually pretty consistent the plants
germinate and then they grow and harvest
all the energy they can from the Sun
before they reproduce and then die and
then the cycle starts all over again
so let's find out more about this cycle
if we look at the evolutionary order of
the plant groups and their life cycles
we can spot some pretty drastic changes
most notably that they have evolved to
live further and further away from water
so let's look at the different plant
types and see how they've evolved over
time let's start where the history of
land planets begin with the bryophytes
and bryophytes may sound like a fancy
word and it is because it's Greek but it
means something as simple as most plants
and bryophyte is a group that consists
of hornworts liverworts mosses they are
the simplest and oldest land plants way
older than the dinosaurs and they
evolved from algae living in fresh water
before realizing if they could get up on
land there would be plenty of space to
grow but the water had provided
protection from the Sun so in order to
make this change the bryophytes first
had to evolve to form a layer over their
tissue to prevent them from drying out
or boiling you can see this yourself if
you take a plant that has never been
outside and place it directly in the Sun
so the bryophytes on land evolved to
produce this protective layer called
particular which consists of fat wax and
a protein called kitty the most complex
group of bryophytes are the mostest and
they have solved one of the hardest
paths in the plant evolution and that is
making cells with newly thin walls so
that they can transport water most of
the water in bryophytes will evaporate
because in order to take up carbon
dioxide they have these tiny holes in
their leaves and most of the water will
escape through them that's okay because
whenever bryophytes get too dry to do
photosynthesis they'll just take a break
this gray patch ahead of me is one of my
favorite buses it's called the woolly
moss and you can probably tell why
because it's quite gray and woolly but
watch what happens when I pour water on
it so you saw now is when it's gray
that means it's dry and then if you pour
water on it it turns green actually
bryophytes are so bad at dyeing that a
lump of moss was recently revived in a
lab and that lump of Moss had just
thought out from underneath a glacier
where it had been for the last 1,500
years that is one epic nap
[Music]
over time a new group of plants emerged
the seedless vascular plants this group
consists of first horse tail and club
moss which confusingly enough isn't moss
they're more advanced in them bryophytes
when it comes to water transportation
their life cycle is pretty much still
the same as prior fights and algae but
their vascular tissue is very different
where bryophytes have thin walled cells
to lead water seedless vascular plants
have empty thin walled cells with holes
in them these dead cells with holes in
them make up what is known as vascular
tissue and ferns roses blueberry plants
and Pines have it too but not only that
they also change the holes in their
leaves they develop specialized cells
around the holes that close anytime the
plant becomes too dry so it doesn't dry
all the way out it doesn't sound like
much but it means that they can just
slow down their photosynthesis instead
of going completely dormant like the
bryophytes progress these plants have
roots to take up water from the ground
but they can do it at a much faster rate
because of the loss of perforated walls
between each cell so these plants were
able to move further onto dry land
because they could access the water from
deeper into the ground this category
with vascular tissue roots and seeds is
called the gymnosperms it comes from
greek meaning naked seeds tim means
naked because when the ancient greeks
did gymnastics they were naked let's not
get distracted
a seed is more protected than a Spore
because while most spores have to
germinate fast or they will die a seed
can wait for a couple of seasons or even
years before they decide to germinate
this means they can wait for the perfect
conditions to grow
and that's not even all the CD plants
have to offer they figured out a way to
grow wider that's called secondary
growth and it's what makes trees
possible gymnosperms include spruce
trees gingko trees and a lot of other
nudists and I call them nudists because
they keep their seeds naked the second
group of vascular plants with seeds and
the latest addition to the evolutionary
tree are the angiosperms another greek
word with an geo meaning boss after
fertilization the Voss turns into what
we know as the fruit angiosperms is the
most diverse plant group containing
grass with their long leaves roses with
their thorns water lilies with their
floating foliage huge oak trees and
cacti angiosperms have a layer of cells
around the egg that resemble a vos and
this wat vos is what turns into fruit
and us humans love trying to put the
different types of fruit into categories
[Music]
botanists looked at the avocado and
mango and said okay fruits with only one
seed inside that is reroute
then they looked at blueberries and
cranberries and said when the fruit has
plenty of seeds inside it's a berry then
they looked at the strange stuff the pea
family and said everything from this
family and nothing else is Peas and
beets after the piece and beans they
looked at fruit that gets hard on the
outside and called it a nut
last but not least they made a category
for fake fruit which is for fruit that
is not made up out of the little boss
but rather from the petals or the flower
and in this group we find apples and
pears sounds pretty straightforward
right no because we use the fruits in
different ways so we get confused so
tomato you would put in a salad right so
it's a vegetable
well no it's fruit that's not the entire
truth because not only is it a fruit
it's a berry because it has so many
seeds inside
[Music]
while we're on the subject of berries
let's look at the strawberry that's got
to be a berry right it's in the name
well you know because the fleshy bulb
that we eat isn't actually made from the
Voss it's made from the petals of the
flower so it's categorized as fake fruit
but the seeds aren't on the inside like
in Apple's in Paris they're on the
outside and they have a hard shell so
they're not so strawberry it's actually
fake fruit with nuts on top but there's
another type of berry you guessed it the
cucumber because it has plenty of seeds
inside and that's the base line of
botany and the evolutionary order of the
plants in this series we'll delve deeper
into the growth and development of
plants and what happens when they die
we'll also be looking at examples from
the for evolutionary groups of what's
normal and then some unique examples so
join us as we take a deeper dive into
the quietly amazing world of plants
[Music]
you